- Between June 1985 and January 1987, a software-controlled radiation therapy machine called the Therac-25 
massively overdosed six people, resulting in serious injury and deaths.

OVERCONFIDENCE IN SOFTWARE
- In safety-critical systems today—including medical devices, aircraft, nuclear power plants, and weapons
systems—standard hardware backups, interlocks, and other safety devices are often replaced by software
- Many hardware engineers (and some software engineers) have so much confidence in software that they
eliminate the hardware protection that was common before software took over
-  Engineers don’t purposely create designs where a hardware single-point failure could lead to a catastrophe. The
same needs to be true for the software in these systems. Protection against software errors can and should be
built into both the system and the software itself.

CONFUSING RELIABILITY WITH SAFETY
- When systems were primarily electro-mechanical, nearly exhaustive testing was possible and design errors could
be eliminated before operational use. What was left during operations were random wearout failures. Safety, then,
could be assumed to be effectively approximated by reliability
- In fact, software by itself isn’t safe or unsafe—safety depends on context. Much of the Therac-25
software had been used on an earlier version of the machine called the Therac-20
- In fact, nearly all accidents involving software have resulted from flawed software requirements, not 
implementation 
- There’s still a widespread but untrue belief that software will be safe if it satisfies its requirements, or 
that the safety of a specific piece of software can be evaluated apart from its use environment.
- Another widespread misunderstanding is that software safety is enhanced by assuring that the software
satisfies the requirements. Almost all software-related accidents have involved requirements flaws, not coding or 
implementation errors.
- If we truly want to reduce software-related accidents, we have to focus less on assurance and more on 
identifying the safety-critical requirements and building safety into these machines from the beginning of
development.

LACK OF DEFENSIVE DESIGN
- The Therac-25 software didn’t contain self-checks or other error-detection and error-handling features that 
would have detected problems. 
- Such verification can’t be assigned to operators without providing them with some means of detecting errors.
- One problem, however, is that so much data is collected—for instance, in aircraft operations—that it’s difficult 
to detect problems until after a serious event has occurred.
- The problem today isn’t in collecting data, but rather in identifying trends and behaviors of the hardware, 
software, and operators that are increasing risk before an accident occurs.

UNREALISTIC RISK ASSESSMENTS
- In general, such calculations often exclude aspects of the problem that are difficult to quantify (such as 
software requirements inadequacies) but which might have a larger impact on safety than the quantitative factors 
that are included. There are few if any scientific evaluations of the correctness of such assessment
- Even after a loss or significant event, engineers and management often ignored the fact that the risk
assessment was obviously wrong, and they continued to believe in it until the next event—and sometimes after
several events—until a major loss occurred.
- The safety program with the best historical track record—the US Navy’s submarine safety program (SUBSAFE)—allows 
decision making about safety using only Objective Quality Evidence, which is defined as “any statement of fact, 
either quantitative or qualitative, pertaining to the quality of a product or service, based on observations, 
measurements, or tests that can be verified.
- A better solution is to design for the worst case (instead of assuming that only the average case will occur)
and creating better decision-making tools that don’t require unsupportable risk assessments.

INADEQUATE INVESTIGATION OF INCIDENTS OR FOLLOW-UP ON ACCIDENT REPORTS
- Superficial accident/incident analyses, usually placing all or most of the blame on the operators, leads to
patching symptoms but not to understanding the deeper underlying and systemic causes of a loss or near loss.
- We need to look at the role of the entire system in the accident to make progress in safety

INADEQUATE SOFTWARE AND SYSTEM ENGINEERING PRACTICES
- The Therac-25 software was created in 1974 and used what are now considered out of date software engineering
practices
- Too often, practices that might be acceptable for website or productivity tools development are used and even
promoted for safety-critical software. A few of these include:
+ Software specifications and documentation are often an afterthought, and the development of requirements 
after the design is created is sometimes even touted as a benefit or necessity. This simply isn’t
true for safety-critical software where the loss might involve not only human life but physical property, critical 
mission loss, and damage to the environment. It should be considered malpractice for software to be created
before the safety requirements are identified. Identifying these requirements will necessitate sophisticated 
system-engineering hazard analysis techniques
+ Software designs are often unnecessarily complex. Whereas object-oriented design is appropriate for data-oriented
systems, it’s not appropriate for control-oriented systems. The resulting software is more difficult to test for 
safety, trace from requirements to code, maintain without affecting safety, and assure the correctness of changes 
to safety-critical requirements. We need to get over the fixation that there is one best way to design software 
for all types of systems
+ Defensive design is sometimes not emphasized. Ways to detect or prevent software errors should be designed in
from the beginning. If written first, error-handling routines will get the most exercise. Many (and perhaps most) 
errors in operational software lie in the error-handling routines themselves. Programming languages that provide 
error protection, such as strong type checking, aren’t always popular or used in safety-critical systems, but are 
necessary for safety-critical systems
+ Software engineers and human factors engineers don’t work together enough. We create software today that’s
confusing to operators and can lead to accidents, but the operator is blamed rather than the software. Software 
design can create operator mode confusion, situation awareness errors, and so on. These dangerous features of 
software need to be avoided or detected and handled in some way.

SOFTWARE REUSE
- Today, overconfidence in reuse is still rampant. A false assumption might be made that reusing software or 
using commercial off-the-shelf software increases safety because the software has been exercised extensively
- Reusing software that was safe in one system doesn’t mean it will be safe when used in a different system.

SAFE VERSUS “FRIENDLY” USER INTERFACES
- Sometimes making the interface easy to use conflicts with safety. For example, eliminating multiple data entry 
and assuming that operators would check the values carefully before pressing the return key was unrealistic for
the Therac-25 and for most systems.
- Relying on operators to detect errors and recover before an accident isn’t realistic, particularly when the
operator isn’t provided with the support to perform this function.
- Some of the radiation therapy accidents since the Therac-25 overdoses have involved operators not being able to
see or react to error messages. The accidents were then blamed on the operators rather than on the machine
and interface design. The same has occurred in other industries, where operators are blamed for accidents
that are primarily the result of flawed engineering.

USER AND GOVERNMENT OVERSIGHT AND STANDARDS
- The FDA (US Federal Drug Administration) puts more emphasis on reporting adverse events in linear accelerators, 
for example, than on preventing them in the first place.
- One problem is the difficulty and time required to update standards. In general, standards should never include
specific techniques (such as failure modes and effects analysis [FMEA] for medical devices) or they will become
out of date almost immediately, without any possibility of being updated for perhaps a decade.
 